Indian Artistry: 10 Distinct Types of Paintings In India
The rich cultural diversity of Indian art is well reflected in the vivid, 
distinct and enchanting folk art and crafts. Various painting styles are prevalent 
across various regions, each representing tradition, customs, and ideologies passed on 
from one generation to other. Traditionally, most of the Indian painting styles existed 
as wall paintings or murals. In due course of time, urbanisation brought these painting forms on paper, 
canvas, and cloth etc. Indian painting styles are not just a reflection of the indigenous lifestyle but a perfect example of artistic expression through simple yet distinct compositions.
Here are some of the popular Indian folk painting styles –

1. Madhubani Paintings
Madhubani Painting Indian Art
Untitled by Baua Devi
One of the most celebrated styles of Indian art is, Madhubani which originated in the Mithila region of Bihar 
as a form of wall art.This spectacular folk art style was unknown to the outside world until discovered by 
the British colonial William G. Archer in 1934 while inspecting the damage after the massive Bihar earthquake. 
Archer was amazed by the beautiful illustrations on the exposed interior walls of the houses…The beauty of Madhubani
 lies in its simple and evocative portrayal of culture and traditions.

The designs are characterised by eye-catching geometrical patterns, symbolic images, and scenes from mythology. 
The balance between the vibrancy of colors and simplicity in its patterns make Madhubani different from 
other painting styles. Bharni, Katchni, Tantrik, Godna, and Kohbar are the five distinct styles of Madhubani painting.

2. Warli Paintings
Warli Painting Indian Art
Warli Art
This ancient Indian art is 2500-year-old tradition. Warli paintings of the Thane and Nasik areas of Maharashtra
 are closely linked with nature and social rituals of the tribe. Warli paintings showcase daily activities of the
 local people of that community like farming, dancing, hunting, praying etc. 
Traditionally, women used twigs to draw lively designs with rice paste on mud walls of tribal houses to mark 
celebrations of harvests or weddings. Simple geometrical patterns in white against a red or yellow surface
 are used to depict everyday life scenes. Warli art with its linear and monochromatic hues resembles 
the execution of pre-historic cave paintings.

3. Kalighat Painting or Bengal Pat
Kalighat Painting Indian Art
Kalighat Painting
The Kalighat painting style was developed around Mid-19th century in the neighbourhood of Kali Temple in Calcutta. 
These drawings on paper were done by a group known as “patuas” hence the name Kalighata Pata. 
They depicted scenes of everyday life and mythological deities in a simple yet captivating manner 
and developed into the popular kalighat style of painting. Kalighat painters predominantly use earthy 
Indian colours like indigo, ochre, Indian red, grey, blue and white. The swift, seamless, 
free-flowing outline is a distinguished characteristic of Kalighat style of paintings.
 This painting style has inspired many artists, the most famous being Jamini Roy, one of the celebrated artist in Indian art.

4. Phad
Phad Painting Indian Art
Pabuji Ki Phad by Bhavana Saxena
Phad is the narrative scroll painting tradition from Rajasthan, dating back to a thousand years. 
Stories of local deities and heroes are painted on horizontal cloth scrolls in hues of red, yellow and orange 
The Phad scrolls show depictions of battlefields, adventure stories, legendary romances and the richness of the
 Indian princely states. The Phad painting style leaves one spellbound at how the folk artists accommodate
 multiple stories in a single composition, yet maintain the aesthetics of artistic expression.

5. Kalamkari
Ganesha Kalamkari painting
Kalamkari Painting
This 3000-year-old organic art of hand and block printing was traditionally used for making narrative scrolls and panels. 
This exquisite folk art has a strong connect with Persian motifs. Kalamkari derives its name from kalam 
or pen and is a legacy that has been handed down from generation to generation in Andhra Pradesh. 
The stylised animal forms, floral motifs and mehrab designs predominant in Kalamkari paintings have 
also found a place in Kalamkari textiles. Kalamkari art primarily involves earthy colours like indigo, 
green, rust, black and mustard. 

6. Miniature Painting
Miniature Painting Indian Art
Miniature
The Miniature painting style came to India with the Mughals in the 16th century and is identified as an
 important milestone in the history of Indian art. It developed into a distinct style with a combination of Islamic, 
Persian and Indian elements. The painting is done using natural stone colors on a paper-based “wasli”. 
Mineral colors, precious stones, conch shells, gold and silver are used in the miniatures.
 Fine brushwork, intricacy, detailing and stylization are the unique attributes of miniature painting.
 Across India, the miniature painting style has developed into distinct schools of miniature paintings 
like Kangra, Rajasthan, Malwa, Pahadi, Mughal, Deccan etc. to name a few. 

7. Gond Painting
Gond Painting Indian Art
Gond Painting by Manoj Kumar Tekam
These vibrant paintings created with a series of intricately arranged dots and dashes were developed by the
 Gondi tribe of central India. The tribals recreate mythological tales and oral histories to traditional songs,
 natural surroundings, important events and rituals in with great intricacy, rich detailing, and bright colors. 
Traditionally, colors were derived from natural resources like cow dung, plant sap, charcoal, coloured soil, mud, 
flowers, leaves etc. Gond artists now use commercial water-based colors to paint on paper and canvas. In today’s times,
 Gond art has moved beyond being a tribal art style with nameless artists to having internationally acclaimed 
artists like Jangarh Singh Shyam, Venkat Shyam, Bhajju Shyam, Durga Bai Vyam to name a few.

8. Kerala Murals
Kerala Mural
Sithyanam by Retheesh T S
The vibrant Kerala mural paintings are one of the world’s most famous frescos and have deep spiritual roots depicting 
themes of Hindu mythology, epics, the classic frolics of Krishna as well as the mystic forms of Siva and Shakti. 
They also recount some legendary heroes of the bygone era. This traditional art style dates to the seventh and 
eighth century AD and is characterised by vivacious imagery, bold strokes, and vivid colours. Ochre-red, yellow- ochre, 
bluish- green, white and pure colors are predominantly used in Kerala mural painting.

9. Patachitra
Pattachitra Painting Indian Art
Orissa Pattachitra
Patachitra is the cloth scroll painting tradition from Odisha, dedicated to mythological and religious themes in Indian art. 
Bold, strong outlines, vibrant colors like white, red yellow and black with decorative borders are some of the characteristics 
of patachitra painting style, that is admired by art lovers across the world.

10. Pichhwai
Pichwai Painting Indian Art
Pichwai Painting
The Indian art of Pichwai originated as wall hangings behind the main deity in Krishna temples in Nathdwara. 
They narrate stories related to Lord Krishna. Gradually with commercialisation secular themes are also 
incorporated in the Picchwai style of painting. Picchwais are colourful and intricate works of art with concealed 
symbolism in the artistic motifs. This distinct devotional art practice has passed from one generation to another 
and a fine example of spirituality in art